gh-128182: Add per-object memory access synchronization to `ctypes` (#128490)
python/cpython: Doc/library/ctypes.rst

   ValueError: NULL pointer access
   >>>

.. _ctypes-thread-safety:

> Thread Safety Without The GIL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thread safety without the GIL
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In Python 3.13, the :term:`GIL` may be disabled on :term:`experimental free threaded <free threading>` builds.

Reviewer: This is orthogonal but whenever I review FT PRs, we always use <code>:term:\`free threaded <free threading>\`</code>. I believe we can add a new term for `free threaded` which points to free threading so that we can reduce the docs burden.

Author: A `free threaded` term sounds like a good idea, but that should probably be in a larger follow-up PR. I'll play around with the wording here though.

> In ctypes, reads and writes to a single object concurrently is safe, but not across multiple objects.::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In ctypes, reads and writes to a single object concurrently is safe, but not across multiple objects:
```

Author: I'm still not fully used to Sphinx :laughing:. Thanks!

   >>> number = c_int(42)
   >>> pointer_a = pointer(number)

>    >>> pointer_b = pointer(number)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. code-block:: pycon

      >>> number = c_int(42)
      >>> pointer_a = pointer(number)
      >>> pointer_b = pointer(number)
```

> In the above, it's only safe for one object to read and write to the address at once if the :term:`GIL` is disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above, it's only safe for one object to read and write to the address at once if the GIL is disabled.
```

Author: Why remove this term?

Reviewer 2: It's linked earlier in this section, close enough and readers aren't likely to start reading *between* the two instances.

So, ``pointer_a`` can be shared and written to across multiple threads, but only if ``pointer_b``
is not also attempting to do the same. If this is an issue, consider using a :class:`threading.Lock`

> to synchronize access to memory.::

Reviewer: Ditto.

>    >>> import threading

Reviewer: Ditto.

   >>> lock = threading.Lock()
   >>> # Thread 1
   >>> with lock:
   ...    pointer_a.contents = 24
   >>> # Thread 2
   >>> with lock:
   ...    pointer_b.contents = 42

.. seealso::

>     :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` if you would like to dynamically synchronize your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Use :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` to dynamically synchronize your application.
```

Are we always using "you" etc in ctypes docs?

   ValueError: NULL pointer access
   >>>

.. _ctypes-thread-safety:

Thread safety without the GIL
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In Python 3.13, the :term:`GIL` may be disabled on :term:`experimental free threaded <free threading>` builds.
In ctypes, reads and writes to a single object concurrently is safe, but not across multiple objects:

   .. code-block:: pycon

      >>> number = c_int(42)
      >>> pointer_a = pointer(number)
      >>> pointer_b = pointer(number)

In the above, it's only safe for one object to read and write to the address at once if the :term:`GIL` is disabled.
So, ``pointer_a`` can be shared and written to across multiple threads, but only if ``pointer_b``
is not also attempting to do the same. If this is an issue, consider using a :class:`threading.Lock`
to synchronize access to memory:

   .. code-block:: pycon

      >>> import threading
      >>> lock = threading.Lock()
      >>> # Thread 1
      >>> with lock:
      ...    pointer_a.contents = 24
      >>> # Thread 2
      >>> with lock:
      ...    pointer_b.contents = 42

.. seealso::

>     Use :func:`sys._is_gil_enabled` to dynamically synchronize your application.

Reviewer 2: What do you mean by this?

Author: I'm fine to remove this. I was originally thinking that the user could do something like:

```py
if sys._is_gil_enabled():
    pointer.contents = 42
else:
    with lock:
        pointer.contents = 42
```

But that's kind of weird, and probably not worth the extra reference in the docs.
